As an exercise to introduce myself to data science, I decided to see if I could find a relationship between housing prices in California and the quality of local public schools. I wanted to see if I could find a quantitative degree of correlation, as well as the potential impact of student racial demographics and the effect of private schools. 

In order to acquire the necessary data, I wrote a script to pull housing data from the internet using Zillow's APIs. School quality information was publicly available on the California Department of Education's website, and demographic information was acquired from US Census data. I then analyzed this data at the ZIP-code level of granularity using Python's Pandas module and statistical tools from Excel, and plotted my results using the Matplotlib module. I measured correlation using Spearman's coefficient since I was not expecting any potential relationship to be linear.

I found that there was indeed a moderate degree of correlation (Spearman's coefficient 0.60) between a given ZIP code's housing prices and its schools' academic performance index (API). I found that this correlation was strongest for white students (0.70) and weakest for black students (0.34), a result that I interpreted as being due to the policy of busing poorer kids to wealthier neighborhood schools.

I also realized that private schools were not measured by API, and that this might affect the correlation between public school API and household income. (For example, if all wealthy parents in a wealthy area sent their children to private schools, then the public schools in the area may not be as good as the area's housing prices/household income predicts.) Using linear regression, I generated a "predicted API" for each ZIP code based on its housing prices. I then measured the difference between this predicted API and the actual API, and plotted these differences against each ZIP code's public school attendance level (which I measured by comparing school and census data). I found a positive correlation (0.52): The greater proportion of students enrolled in public school, the greater the actual minus predicted API of the schools. These results supported my hypothesis that high private school attendance drives down the quality of the public schools.

I believe my results will be most useful for a family of modest means looking to relocate with their children's education in mind. Such a family should seek to live in an area with low private school attendance, since the stronger community support for the area's public schools should translate into higher school quality.
